Okay, so now we've encountered a file
that belongs to another user that we want to delete.
So we have this directory rems-dir,
and if we look at this column here,
we'll look at permissions in next video,
the one thing you can see that's different
is the owner is remy, not rem,
so there's this other person with the same name, sort of,
that has this rems-dir.
But we can go into it, and we can see
there's a secret file in there, okay.
Let's cat that secret out.
Hmm, permission denied.
So that means I don't have permission
to actually look at it.
Well, I don't want it in my directory,
so I'm going to get rid of it.
Yes.
Ah, permission denied as well.
Well, let's try the forced delete.
Also permission denied.
So in this case, I don't have permission to
get rid of the file at all, and it means I'm stuck with it.
Although this is contrived, I put the file there
in the first place, there might be a legitimate reason
why you don't have permission to write a file,
to delete a file.
But sometimes you might be trying to clear something up,
or fix some problem, and in this case
we need to get rid of this secret,
and so the way to do that is to use something called sudo.
And sudo is literally spelled S-U-D-O,
so superuser do.
It's kind of like Simon Says, and then you give a command.
So sudo rm, or let's cat out the secret.
Sudo cat secret, so it's like saying
I want to make this superuser, which is root,
which is the owner of all the machinery,
the root user can do anything to this machine,
sudo cat the secret.
At that point it's going to ask me for my password,
not the superuser's password, but my password.
And what it's doing here is it tends to record
that I try to do a thing.
By default, if you have a Mac out of box
there'll be certain things you can sudo to do,
and there'll be some things you can't do.
And we'll come on to how you do that in a moment,
but I'm just going to put in my password,
and it cats out the file, so it means that
the superuser, that root user that has all the power,
is able to cat that file out.
So try that again ourselves, permission denied,
but we're using the superuser, we're able to
cat the file out, which also means we can delete
the file using the same command,
so this doesn't work, but,
sudo rm secret will work.
Okay, and it didn't ask me the password that time
because I had recently used sudo,
and when you've recently used it,
it just kind of keeps the fact that
you're authenticated for a few minutes.
I can't remember exactly how long it is,
but if I open up another terminal window,
it'll ask me the password again.
So that's now gone.
I've removed the secret that I didn't have permission
to remove before, and if we go back into this directory,
let's see if we can remove rm -rf rems-dir,
and we're able to get rid of it completely,
because that file that we didn't have permission to
read or write has been removed, and in this case,
in the rems-dir, I was part of the same group.
Again, we'll look at permission in a moment,
I just want to stay on sudo for a moment.
So sudo, you can do a number of things.
You can go to the very top-most superuser, known as root.
Typically we just sudo and then some command.
But you can also sudo to other users,
so you can become other users, and the way
that you might do that is sudo and the su,
which is switch user, I'm thinking.
Yeah, switch user.
And then I can give the user name of the other user
and I'll be prompted, oop, I haven't been prompted
because I already put my password in,
and now I've actually switched user.
If I type in whoami, you can see I'm remy,
whereas typically whoami shows rem.
So it means I've switched users at that point.
Now, on this Mac at the moment,
there's no real great advantage to switching between users,
but when you're working on a machine that's shared,
maybe like a remote server, being able
to switch users is pretty handy,
being able to kind of su to root,
so you could do sudo dash root,
I think if you don't give a, yeah,
if you don't give a user name, the dash means
kind of pull in and automatically go to the root directory.
And you can see here, this was my user name before,
this is my user name now.
Whoami, I'm root on this machine.
Now, like I said root has power to do everything.
They can delete files from any user,
they can change permissions, cause all kinds of chaos,
and this is actually the reason why
we're not root by default, we don't have permission
to do all this stuff by default.
Say for instance you try to delete like
a core system file from your Mac or your PC,
you want it to prompt you
and maybe even stop you from doing that.
Couple of decades ago, or in fact more than that,
I had a PC and I deleted two of the core files
that you used to boot the entire thing.
Never prompted me to do it, I was trying to
clean up some space, and because it didn't have
that permissioning system in place,
I completely hosed the machine.
I had to learn very quickly how to fix it all.
So that is why by default I'm signed in as Rem or Remy,
I'm always signed in as like a lower user,
and you will be as well.
If you're finding that you're signing in as root
to a machine, you want to kind of look at
why you're doing that and maybe consider
creating a new user with less privileges.
It also means that if your password
is compromised somehow, they may not have the root password.
There's a lot more insecurity that you can read about,
but sudo's very powerful, but be wary of it,
be wary that it can do anything.
It can really make a big mess.
So, like I mentioned just earlier,
you may not have permission to do everything
that root can do, and you may
or may not want to change that,
but there is a file in /etc/sudoers
which controls how much sudo power you have.
So we jump into that file, we get permission denied.
If I do sudo and then vi /etc/sudoers,
you don't have to use vi,
you can use something less sublime,
but I'm just showing you the file for the moment,
you can see in here now I have permission
to open the file because I used sudo,
the root user will open it,
and if we run down here, you can see
I've already added rem to have the ability to do everything.
And all I did was copy this line,
root ALL=(ALL) ALL,
and I just copy and pasted it in the line below,
putting in my user name and saving that at that point
my user can do everything.
So that's sudo.
Use with care, but it's definitely worth knowing about
to get a kind of, just get outside the limits of your user.